title:U.S., Philippines finalize intel-sharing pact to counter China

JAKARTA -- U.S. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin on Wednesday renewed Washington's "ironclad" commitment to defend the Philippines after China escalated tensions in the South China Sea by firing a water cannon at a Philippine resupply vessel.

Austin met with Gilbert Teodoro, the Philippine minister of national defense, in Jakarta on the sidelines of the ASEAN Defense Ministers' Meeting Plus, the first in-person engagement since Teodoro took office in June.

The meeting is intended to send a clear message that U.S. President Joe Biden's administration will stand by its Asian ally and uphold Philippine maritime claims regardless of the outcome of the high-stakes APEC summit between U.S. and Chinese leaders in San Francisco on Wednesday.

The joint communique released after the meeting said: "The United States stands shoulder-to-shoulder with the Philippines in defending its sovereign rights and jurisdiction in its Exclusive Economic Zone."

It reaffirmed that the 1951 U.S.-Philippines Mutual Defense Treaty "extends to both countries' armed forces, public vessels, and aircraft -- including those of its Coast Guard -- anywhere in the Pacific, to include the South China Sea."

On Friday, a Chinese coast guard ship fired a water cannon on a Philippine motorboat that was attempting to resupply a small military contingent on a grounded World War II warship at Ayungin Shoal, or Second Thomas Shoal, in the South China Sea.

It was the second time this year Beijing used water cannons on Philippine vessels, raising concerns that such intimidation tactics could become the new normal in the critical waterway. In February, Chinese vessels used a military-grade laser on Philippine ships.

To address China's unsafe actions, U.S. and Philippine defense leaders pledged to conclude quickly a new framework for intelligence-sharing known as GSOMIA. The pact is meant for both sides to exchange more sophisticated military intelligence in a more timely manner.

"What I would say is we are coordinating more closely with the Philippines operationally, and in sharing information, than I think we ever have in the past," a senior U.S. defense official told reporters.

"Certainly, as they are facing a lot of enhanced pressure and aggression in the South China Sea, this is a moment in which we are working more closely together than ever, to think about how we deal with that," the official said.

A better understanding of the movements of Chinese ships through real-time intelligence sharing would help the Philippines execute resupply operations safely, and prepare for responses to a contingency.

The grounded ship, named Sierra Madre, on the Ayungin Shoal serves as a symbol of Manila's maritime claims in the Spratly Islands. China rejects the Philippine position and alleges that it has historical rights over most of the South China Sea, including Ayungin Shoal.

In 2016, an international tribunal at The Hague in the Netherlands rejected China's claims that it has historical rights within its so-called nine-dash line in the South China Sea, and stated that Second Thomas Shoal fell within the Philippines' Exclusive Economic Zone. China has always ignored the tribunal's decision and has tried to assert control in the area.

The United States Navy has stepped up operational coordination with its Philippine counterpart. It hopes that its presence will help to stave off any escalation toward a military confrontation.

After the October collision, a Philippine Armed Forces official told reporters that two of its naval vessels, along with U.S. missile-guided destroyer Dewey, had been positioned near Escoda Shoal, off the west coast of Palawan Island, which is fairly close to Ayungin Shoal.

A senior Philippine official told Nikkei that while the three vessels were not within sight of Chinese ships, their presence was intended to send a signal to Beijing that Washington and Manila are working together to deal with China's provocations.

But American naval officers suggested that Dewey's position was still too far away for it to be able to respond rapidly should a serious incident happen, the Philippine official said.

Critics said that while the United States Navy presence has a deterrent effect, it could also escalate tensions by giving China a pretext to send its vessels to the scene.