title:Retail report

Although we are facing economic headwinds, multiple tailwinds including Artificial Intelligence (AI), retail media, the transition to renewable energy and the return of demand for physical stores are laying new foundations from which retailers can grow their businesses in the year ahead.

Heading into the fourth year of a decade that started with excitement and optimism about the power of technology to change the way we shop, it feels like retailers are finally ready to get out of first gear. The Pandemic, the war in Ukraine, political instability and a declining consumer economy have all taken their toll, but significant lessons have been learned about how to survive and ultimately thrive under rising cost pressures, supply chain constraints and changing consumer behaviour. For some retailers, 2023 will be an opportunity to reset their ambitions and start on a path to recovery, involving some difficult choices along the way. For others, the lessons learned over the past three years, combined with major advances in technology and legislation that favours the retailer, mean there is an opportunity to finally unleash the full potential of their business, achieving profitable, sustainable growth.

Regardless of the scale of their ambition this year, the decisions that will need to be made by retailers will require strong and effective, but also thoughtful and empathetic leadership. Leadership is a theme that runs throughout all our trends for 2023, whether it is making strategic investments or decisions on cutting costs to unlock value, ensuring your business stays focussed on the customer experience in the face of extreme challenges, pushing your net zero agenda or transitioning to a skills-based organisation. But leadership is not just demonstrated in the boardroom. To be successful, retailers will need employees across their organisations to step up and demonstrate leadership traits in the year ahead.

Here are four major trends for retailers to look out for throughout the rest of the year:

Unlocking Value

The reality of ongoing cost pressures means that retailers are having to make difficult decisions about prioritising capital allocation. Therefore, we expect to see a renewed focus on performance improvement in the year ahead. Specifically, we predict that retailers will focus on identifying, improving, and creating efficiencies across all areas of their business, whilst also looking to maximise the value of their available assets. This approach will allow retailers to unlock the true value of their business, creating an environment that allows for profitable sustainable growth.

Experience Innovation

In the year ahead, we will continue to see innovative technology and business models serve changing consumer behaviour across every aspect of the customer journey. Retailers will differentiate themselves in a crowded, competitive market by engaging directly with consumers, encouraging the growth of communities, and actively encouraging interaction with their brands. Elsewhere, the ability to communicate and serve consumers where they spend most of their time means that we will see more retailers focus on social commerce and gaming as a growth opportunity. Likewise, the demand from consumers for physical experiences will force retailers to offer immersive, technology filled stores as standard.

Planet & Society

The success of the retail industry in the year ahead may come to be defined by how retailers manage to navigate some of the most serious and complex issues we face. Whilst rules and regulations around everything from emissions to the ingredients in our food mean that retailers have a legal responsibility to act on these issues, there is actually a strategic advantage to be had, with major growth opportunities available in these spaces. We predict that 2023 will be the year when retailers adopt business practices that shift the dial on their net zero commitments, finally making their (sometimes) lofty targets seem achievable.